well the question that was posed which
principles and values rule the world
immediately brings to mind a comment by
the famous American political campaign
manager Mark Hanna he was asked what is
needed to run a successful political
campaign and he answered that two things
are important
the first is money and I can't remember
what the second one is that was 1895
long before the current period of
multibillion-dollar political campaigns
in the United States where the primary
task of an elected representative from
the first moment of taking office is to
begin to try to raise money for the next
campaign while corporate lobbyists
working together with his staff for fair
legislation for him to sign with
predictable consequences all of this is
part of a general assault on democracy
matter to which I'll return well mark
Hanna's comment provides a large part of
the answer to the question of what
principles and values rule the world but
it's not quite that simple it's a large
part but not all there are quite
important cases when a wealth and global
power have been dissociated in fact that
was true when Hannah spoke those words
in 1895 at that time of the United
States was by far the richest country in
the world but it was not a major global
power
it's reach extended the richness was so
great that it was in beyond even the sum
of the two the second and the third
richest powers from England and Germany
the reach of the United States did
extend at the time over North America
and the Caribbean largely but not much
beyond on the eve of the first world war
the economy as I mentioned was greater
than Germany and Britain combined but it
still trailed Britain or for that matter
even France as a global power
so money and power were significantly
dissociated that of course changed
dramatically with the two world wars a
particularly world war two other
industrial powers were devastated or
severely harmed while the war greatly
benefited the United States
manufacturing actually quadrupled
military spending and that the
depression the basis was laid for rapid
post-war growth based substantially on
the dynamic state sector of the economy
which prepared the ground for today's
high-tech economy by the end of the war
Second World War the United States might
have had as much as half of the total
world a wealth of the world astonishing
figure data for that period or somewhat
imprecise it also had incomparable
security and a position of global power
with no historical precedent France
declined very sharply as world power and
the British recognized
that they could only hope to be a junior
partner in the system of world order
managed in Washington as the British
Foreign Office ruefully put the matter
with Apple historical experience of
their own high British officials had few
illusions about what was happening they
recognized I'll quote them that
Washington is guided by the economic
imperialism of American business
interests and is attempting to elbow us
out under the cloak of a benevolent and
a funkier internationalism that's
actually a fair estimate of the real
nature of the principles and the
professed values one senior British
Minister commented that Americans
believe that the United States stands
for something in the world something of
which the world has need something which
the world is going to like something in
the final analysis which the world is
going to take whether it likes it or not
he was articulating the real world
vision of what scholarship calls
Wilsonian idealism the version that
conforms to the historical and internal
documentary record well naturally the
immediate post-war position of global
dominance could not be entirely
maintained other industrial countries
reconstructed the decolonization took
its agonizing course leading to a more
diverse international system but with
the United States still uniquely
powerful so by 1970 when we have good
statistics the US share of global wealth
had declined to about
five percent still enormous though not
what it had been in 1945 and it remains
today not far below that these are
conventional estimates by economists and
however they give a misleading picture
of the principles and values that rule
the world
crucially world order has changed under
the impact of the policies of neoliberal
globalization of the world economy of
the past generation and by today a
corporate ownership of the world's
wealth is becoming a more realistic
measure of global power than national
wealth as the world departs more than
before from the model of nationally
discrete political economies is very
revealing insight into these matters and
provided by important work by Sean
Starr's he's the first political
economist to have investigated these
questions closely and the results of his
investigations are quite illuminating
turns out that in virtually every
economic sector manufacturing finance
services retail and others US
corporations are well in the lead in
ownership of the global economy and
overall their ownership is close to 50%
of the total of world wealth roughly
what US national wealth was in 1945 so
in that regard there's been little
fundamental change though a shift in the
character of ownership of the world one
good illustration is iPhone's we
I suppose most of you have these are
assembled in China by Taiwanese firms
major one is Foxconn these Taiwanese for
Taiwanese firms are intern
subcontractors for Apple in 2014 last
year for which we have good figures Fox
cons profit was 4.3 billion dollars
while apples was 10 times larger than 40
4.5 billion dollars and China's share of
profit was tiny though it is formerly
considered the exporter of iPhones and
there are similar measures across the
international economy now multinational
corporations are nationally based and
they rely on their home nation state for
protection and sustenance even for their
existence quite generally they expect
the public to pay the costs and to take
the risks of substantial parts of
research and development and then to
hand the results over to them in the
system of really existing state
capitalism which is based substantially
on the principle of public subsidy
private profit and of course they demand
and receive exorbitant patent
protections to ensure monopoly rights
for a long period it's a huge tax on the
population fundamental feature of all
the mislabeled free trade agreements
this is in addition to the astronomical
tax burden transferred to the public by
offshore tax havens other devices
available to the corporate sector and
the super-rich the end result of all of
this is that in the current globalized
world
of state-based multinational
corporations the US dominance of the
world economy is in important respects
not that different from what it was in
1945 and the phrase United States of
course does not refer to its population
but rather to a tiny sector of extreme
privilege and power within the society
pretty much a fraction of 1% turning to
another dimension of power in the
military dimension the u.s. is of course
in entirely without parallel spends
almost as much as the rest of the world
combined
technologically far more advanced
hundreds of bases all over the world
military operations in every contract
eclis continent no one else is even
close in these respects apart from money
and force another factor in global rule
is public opinion in theory at least
sometimes in fact in the more free
societies this has been a battleground
for centuries and it still is with quite
an intricate interplay of principles and
values structures of power and
Liberatore commitments it's quite
instructive to take a closer look at
this at this complex so consider first
the question of values it's quite easy
to demonstrate that every world power
past and present has been committed to
the highest values to demonstrate this
it's only necessary to listen to the
pronouncements of political figures and
the intellectual classes so for example
a few days ago
the New York Times featured a lengthy
debate with contributions with many
eminent scholars on whether America's
unique global mission of championing
democracy and human rights is being
undermined by ongoing crimes crimes of
the Russians the global mission is not
defended in this debate
it's proposed accepting its validity is
a precondition for admission into
serious company into serious discussion
going back earlier in Britain's day in
the Sun similar mystical allusions were
promulgated even by such a critical
intelligence as John Stuart Mill
actually right at a moment a peak moment
of Britain's international crimes
Japanese imperialists were bringing in
what they called an earthly paradise to
China and protecting the Chinese people
from Chinese bandits while they were
massacring and destroying in Nanjing and
it would not be easy to find an
exception to this pattern I actually
have never found one furthermore
contrary to their carefully cultivated
self-image as courageous and in the
independent-minded critics intellectuals
have rarely failed to provide their
services to the powerful throughout
history going back as far as classical
Greece in the Bible a good illustration
of the general pattern is world war 1
which is now eliciting a good deal of
valuable research and commentary on this
end
tannery one topic is not much discussed
but it's interesting at the time during
World War one prominent intellectuals on
all sides lined up enthusiastically in
support of their own states to
demonstrate the nobility of the German
cause the famous manifesto of
ninety-three German intellectuals
appealed to the legacy of dirt Beethoven
and Kant
whose work was banned in the United
States under the progressive Wilson
administration their counterparts in the
West were no less enthusiastic so in the
United States John Dewey and his
progressive intellectual circle held
Woodrow Wilson's decision to join the
war as a triumph I'll quote them a
triumph accomplished by a class which
must comprehensively but loosely be
described as the intellectuals that's us
who ensured that the United States
entered the war under the influence of a
moral verdict reached after the utmost
liberation by the more thoughtful
members of the community who were in
fact the victims of concoctions of the
British Ministry of Information which
secretly defined its tasks as to direct
the thought of most of the world but
particularly the thought of American
progressive intellectuals who might help
with a pacifist country into war fever
as they did very successfully Woodrow
Wilson won the 1960 presidential
election on the slogan peace without
victory and instantly with the help of
the
most thoughtful members of the community
within months was able to convert the
country the one dedicated to victory
without peace there were of course some
around the world who did not tow the
line so obediently including such
notable figures as Bertrand Russell
Eugene Debs Rosa Luxemburg and Karl
Liebknecht who all ended in prison some
were treated more leniently like the
prominent American essayist Randolph
Bourne he was not imprisoned he was
simply dropped by progressive journals
after he committed the crime of
criticizing what he called the League of
benevolently imperialist nations and
their exalted endeavors this pattern of
praise and punishment is a consistent
one throughout recorded history in
general when political and intellectual
leaders proclaimed the highest values
their pronouncements carry no
information even in the technical sense
of the term information their
predictable whatever the facts true
there is always a possibility that the
claims have some degree of validity but
a skeptical mind is always in order with
regard to the United States the stance
is commonly described as American
exceptionalism but the term is incorrect
there's nothing at all exceptional about
the stance or about the ease with which
huge crimes can be dismissed in the US
case that includes the two original sin
of the society the virtual extermination
of the indigenous population and the
most vicious form of slavery in history
which also happened to be a cornerstone
of the modern economy in manufacturing
finance Commerce for the United States
and England particularly for others as
well and the impact is lasting to the
present day symbolic of the continuing
impact are two critically important
human rights cases that are now being
pursued actively right here the case of
long time prisoners Mumia abu-jamal
and leonard peltier well going back to
the professed values among them is that
prominent among them is that public
opinion should determine policy and
hence rule the world and it's worth
taking a closer look at this doctrine in
the modern period the issues came to the
fore primarily in the more free
societies the first England then the
United States they were raised by David
Hume in his discussion of the first
principles of government and his words
as usual or lucid and compelling I'll
simply quote them Hume found nothing
more surprising than to see the easiness
with which the many are governed by the
few and to observe the implicit
submission with which men resigned their
own sentiments and passions to those of
their rulers when we inquire by what
means this wonder is brought about we
shall find that as force is always on
the side of the governed the governors
have nothing to support them but opinion
tis therefore an opinion only that
government is founded and this maxim
extends to the most despotic and most
military governance as well as to the
most free and the most popular well Hume
was an astute observer and his paradox
of government is much to the point
although history teaches us all too
painfully that we cannot ignore the
contrary thesis which had been put forth
somewhat earlier during the English
Civil War the thesis that the power of
the sword is and ever has been the
foundation of all titles the government
the force of course has more subtle
modes including an array of costs well
short of overt violence that attached to
the refusal to submit Humes concept of
supportive opinion can be elaborated as
in Graham Chian concepts of hegemony and
others but the basic point I think is
correct
public consent and implicit submission
can take many forms among them the form
recognized by the British Foreign Office
in 1945 like it or not this is what
you're going to get a more polite way of
putting the matter had been devised by
American sociologist Franklin Henry
Giddings when US forces landed in the
Philippines at the turn of the 20th
century with the goal of as the
president put it to uplift and civilized
our little brown brothers fact uplifting
several hundred thousand of them
directly to heaven and leaving wreckage
that in many ways remains and is right
now in fact eliciting quite a remarkable
reaction over a century later as you can
read in the front pages well to explain
the civilizing mission in proper tones
Giddings devised the concept consent
without consent here's the way put it if
in later years the colonized will see
and admit that the disputed relation was
for the higher interest it may
reasonably be held that authority has
been imposed with the consent of the
governed the rather as when a parent
prevents a child from running into the
busy street and the child later comes to
recognize that it was the right thing to
do this concept consent without consent
has been of considerable utility for
structures of dominance not only in
Imperial history but with all the
possible elaborations the essential core
remains pretty straightforward that much
as humilated it and the conundrum is
real even despotic rule is commonly
founded on a measure of consent was true
for the Nazis for example the abdication
of Rights is familiar in more free
societies and yet popular opinion is not
a force easily discounted particularly
when it's organized and mobilized an
elite opinion particularly in the more
democratic societies has always
recognized it to be a serious threat
particularly at moments when it proves
effective and has to be repressed and
controlled in the service of the higher
interests of power and wealth which are
supposed to
rule the world by right these crisis
crises issues arise regularly at moments
of disruption and crisis one case of
very great historical significance was
the formation of the independent United
States two hundred and fifty years ago
with of course a new constitution and
Humes conundrum arose at once it was
formulated sharply by James Madison
leading framer of the Constitution
England was of course the model that the
framers considered and Madison pointed
out then quoting him that if in England
elections were open to all classes of
people the landless majority would
Institute an agrarian law which would
distribute property and that of course
would be unjust the rights of property
owners must be protected and more
generally as Madison put it a--just
government must protect the minority of
the opulent against the majority a basic
principle that rules the world
Madison recognized that over time that
was likely to be an increase quoting him
an increase in the proportion of those
who will labor under all the hardships
of life and secretly saw for a more
equal distribution of its blessings and
their levelling spirit may lead to
efforts at reform which will threaten
property rights the popular from ferment
of the time Madison felt already gave
warning of the future danger and to work
ward off such injustice the Madisonian
Constitution the one we have and you
know
States assigns primary power to the
Senate which at that time was unelected
and which represented as Madison put it
the wealth of the nation those who have
sympathy for property owners and their
rights the rest would then be fragmented
in various ways and he hoped that by
such means the great majority would be
marginalized and controlled so that
power would remain in the hands of the
privileged few by consent without
consent and for the benefit of all it's
important to remember that Madison's
mentality was pre-capitalist
he assumed that those who held the
wealth of the nation would be benevolent
gentlemen aristocrats of the mythical
Roman model dedicated to the public good
Adam Smith at exactly the same time had
a much sharper eye he wrote 1776 that
those he called the Masters of mankind
and for him the merchants and
manufacturers of England would follow
their vile Maxim all for ourselves
nothing for anyone else did not take too
long for Madison to recognize his error
of writing to Jefferson and 1792 he
deplored the daring depravity of the
times as stock jobbers become the
Praetorian brand of government at once
its tools and its tyrants bribed by its
largesses
over eyeing it by clamors and
combinations which is not a bad
description of today's neoliberal world
two hundred and twenty-five years later
it's of some interest to compare
Madison's concerns with those of our
doddle in the first major work of
political science is politics
Aristotle reviewed a variety of
political systems he concluded that
democracy was the best or perhaps the
least bad but he recognized a flaw the
great mass of the poor could use their
voting power to take the property of the
rich which would be unjust our Madison
and Aristotle faced the same problem but
they selected opposite solutions
Aristotle advised reducing inequality by
what we would call welfare state
measures Madison felt that the answer
was to reduce democracy setting the
stage for popular struggles elite
repression that continued until the
present day such conflicts arise
regularly when social life is destructed
disrupted maybe by depression or by war
so during World War one the United
States was only peripherally engaged but
nevertheless the war was followed by a
severe repression Woodrow Wilson's Red
Scare the harsh harshest repression in
modern US history
thousands of people were deported many
were jailed the vigorous labor movement
was smashed
along with independent thought it paved
the way for the Gilded Age that followed
through the 1920s until it collapsed
with the Great Depression well despite
the short term efficacy of force the
masters of mankind understood that
enough freedom had been won by popular
struggle so that state violence was
becoming inadequate to control the
masses and it would be necessary to
impose with whom called implicit
submission in other ways
by control of attitudes and opinion
recognition of this new reality was
expressed in both intellectual opinion
and in institutional form in
intellectual opinion the recognition was
articulated in essays of the 1920s on
democratic theory most notably by walter
Lippmann the most respected and
influential u.s. public intellectual of
the 20th century in its institutional
counterpart the recognition was
expressed in the rise of the huge public
relations industry initially and most
expensively in the war free societies
the United States and Britain where it
was needed most to ensure that the
public will in Humes phrase resign their
own sentiments and passions to those of
their rulers the enormous public
relations industry was devoted to what
Lippmann approvingly called a new art
and the practice of democracy the
manufacture of consent the engineering
of consent in the phrase of his
associate Edward Bernays was one of the
founders of the public relations
industry and it's worth remembering that
Lippmann and Bearnaise were at the
social-democratic edge of the political
spectrum kind of left end they were
Wilson roseville Kennedy liberals us
since the term liberal means social
democratic both of them had been members
of the first state propaganda agency the
Wilsons
Committee on Public Information the
Orwellian name created to drive pacifist
population to jingoist fanaticism and
hatred of all things German
and it succeeded brilliantly very much
impressing the members of the Commission
like Lippmann and Bearnaise who hoped
that the same techniques would ensure
that what they called the intelligent
minorities would rule undisturbed by the
trampling and the roar of a bewildered
herd the general public ignorant and
meddlesome outsiders whose function is
to be spectators not participants it's a
central theme of Lippmann so-called
progressive essays on democracy from
which on taking these quotes and in the
same vein one of the founders of modern
political science Harold Lasswell
another eminent progressive figure urge
that we not succumb to democratic
dogmatism 'he's about men being the best
judges of their own interests they are
not we are the responsible man
and the thinking captures very well the
perceptions of progressive intellectual
opinion so President Wilson for example
held that an a leech of gentlemen with
elevated ideals must be empowered to
preserve stability and righteousness
it's essentially the perspective of the
founders of American democracy in more
recent years the elite of gentlemen are
transmuted into what's called the
technocratic elite the action
intellectuals of Kennedy's Camelot
Strauss II and neo-cons
other configurations but throughout one
or another variant of the doctrine
prevails with its rather striking
Leninist overtones as I mentioned the
threat of democracy regularly arises
when social life is disrupted
by economic crisis or war the Great
Depression and World War two led to a
powerful wave of radical democracy all
over the world with interesting
consequences that there's no time to go
into but within the United States the
reaction was similar to Wilson's Red
Scare after World War one the
anti-communist crusade which is
mislabeled McCarthyism actually McCarthy
carried it to an extreme and he was
tolerated as long as he kept to the
right targets but he was eliminated very
quickly when he made the mistake of
attacking systems of authentic power the
tumult of the 1960s that much of it
inspired by the Indochina Wars raised
similar elite concerns and we're living
now in the aftermath once again the most
revealing reactions are at the left end
of mainstream spectrum they were clearly
articulated in an important study
entitled the crisis of democracy was
written by liberal internationalists
from Europe the United States and Japan
within the United States it's the group
that staffed the Carter Administration
gives an indication of their political
stance the crisis that they perceived
mirrored the traditional concern that
there's too much democracy the American
reporter Harvard professor government
adviser Samuel Huntington looked back
with nostalgia to the days when as he
put it
Truman had been able to govern the
country with the cooperation of a
relatively small number of Wall Street
lawyers and bankers so that democracy
flourished with no crisis
the public was silent passive apathetic
obedient willing to be spectators not
participants leaving serious matters to
the intelligent minority to adopt the
Lippmann Bernays terminology but in the
1960s a threat to order begun to arise
special interest groups tried to enter
the political arena and press for their
demands the special interests were women
minorities young people old people
farmers workers in short the population
who began to forsake the function of
passive spectators assigned to them in
progressive democratic theory there was
one group that was omitted in the lament
of the liberal internationalists the
corporate sector they do not comprise
the special interest they represent the
national interest and therefore their
dominant influence and what we call
democracy is right and proper and merits
no mention or concern the one leading
concern of the trilateral scholars will
the failure of the institutions
responsible for what they called the
indoctrination of the young the schools
and the universities they were not
indoctrinating the young properly and
that's why we see these uprisings in the
streets and the efforts of the special
interests to press their demands in the
political arena and the trilateral
scholars therefore urged more moderation
and democracy their phrase if the
national interest is to be protected
along with more effective indoctrination
of the youth it's of some interest to
look at the right-wing counterpart to
the what to the liberal Internet
last call for more moderation and
democracy intellectually it's much less
interesting what's of course much more
influential with direct ties to systems
of power it's most eloquent expression
was in a memorandum by corporate lawyer
Louis Powell soon to be appointed to the
Supreme Court it was a memorandum that
was sent secretly to the business based
american chamber of commerce soon leaked
its title is the attack on the American
free enterprise system it's interesting
not only for the content but for the
paranoid tone you might want to look it
up on the internet it's interesting
reading for those who take for granted
their right to rule if anything gets out
of control it means that the world is
coming to an end rather like a spoiled
three-year-old child so the rhetoric
tends to be inflated and paranoid Powell
identifies the criminals who are
destroying the American free enterprise
system Ralph Nader with his consumer
safety campaigns Herbert mark who'sa who
was preaching preaching Marxism to the
young new leftists who were on the
rampage all over while what he calls
their naive victims dominated the
universities and schools controlled
television and other media the educated
community virtually the entire
government and their takeover of the
country he said is a dire threat to
freedom
Powell through the obvious conclusion a
business owns the country and therefore
the oppressed businesspeople who have
lost all influence to this rampage
should organize and defend themselves
instead of idly sitting by while
fundamental freedoms are destroyed
by the Marxist onslaught from the media
the universities and the government and
despite the absurdity of the picture it
shouldn't be simply dismissed with
ridicule this is the mentality of the
Masters of mankind who can act and do
act as after World War one the
ideological constructions of the
intellectual classes had their
institutional counterpart in this case
the neoliberal programs that began to
take shape by the late 1970s accelerated
under Reagan and Thatcher than beyond
right to the present among their other
effects all of these programs undermine
functioning democracy quite severely in
Europe and in the United States as well
no time to review the details sure
they're familiar including the collapse
of the center and the extreme contempt
for institutions which can take ominous
forms as we know I'm old enough to
remember the emotional impact of
Hitler's speeches which I heard on the
radio as a child not understanding the
words the mood that they evoked was
clear enough and current electoral
results particularly in Austria and
Germany evoked some unpleasant memories
fortunately a lot has been achieved
since these terrifying days providing us
with a legacy of freedom and justice
that affords opportunities to recover
what has been lost and to move on and to
confront new challenges including some
of extraordinary significance no
discussion today of how the world is
ruled or in fact of any human issue
should fail at the very least to mention
that this generation is facing dire
questions that have never arisen before
in human history questions concerning
the survival of organized human society
both the growing threat of terminal
nuclear war and the inescapable prospect
of catastrophic environmental damage to
grim shadows that hover over every
choice and decision that we can that we
confront and these choices and decisions
are urgent and cannot be deferred they
will determine whether there is even a
meaningful question about rule of the
world
well I began by mentioning mark Ana's
observation about the rule of the world
by money I might end by recalling Albert
Einstein's response when he was asked
about the weapons that would be used in
the next war and what he said is I know
not with what weapons World War 3 will
be fought but World War 4 will be fought
with sticks and stones that's among
those who remain above water that is as
the huge glaciers of the Antarctic
continue to melt rising raising sea
level substantially and other effects of
human folly take their course always
with David Humes proviso if we maintain
the implicit submission with which men
resigned their sentiments and passions
to those of their rulers which is not a
necessity but a choice a choice as to
whether organized human society will
survive
you